---
title: Why jsii?
icon: braces-asterisk
description: |-
    In this article, I discuss what led to the creation of jsii, and explain some of the design constraints it was built
    under.
---
In this article, I discuss what led to the creation of [jsii], and explain some of the design constraints it was built
under.

For those unfamiliar, [jsii] is the technology that enables the
[AWS <abbr title="Cloud Development Kit">CDK</abbr>][aws-cdk] to be entirely authored in *TypeScript*, while being
available to use in several other languages (*C#* and other .NET languages, *Go*, *Java*, *Python*, ...).

## The inception of AWS CDK

<cite>Elad Ben-Israel</cite> recalls the events that led to the creation of [AWS CDK][aws-cdk] in the
[foreword][cdk-book-fw] he wrote for [The CDK Book][cdk-book]: developers build increasingly complex applications on
*the cloud*, and shift towards <abbr title="Infrastructure as Code">IaC</abbr> solutions such as *AWS CloudFormation* to
achieve reliable, reproductible infrastucture provisioning. While this is a clear upgrade from manually provisioning
infrastructure in the *AWS Console* or writing custom scripts using the *AWS CLI*, maintaining growing YAML templates
can quickly become daunting &ndash; they are effectively a flat list of *resources* that isn't well correlated to the
mental model or goals of the developers maintaining it. Eventually, large amounts of code end up copied across the
template, making it difficult to keep up with best practices.

Software engineers have designed techniques to deal with large projects, leading to the invention of
<abbr title="Object-Oriented Programming">OOP</abbr> &ndash; a programming model that thrives on creating abstractions
to reduce the perceived complexity of a system. Abstractions are closer to the developer's mental model, and facilitate
re-use and composition.

OOP seemed like a natural fit for IaC: the inherent complexity of cloud services could be hidden away by layering
abstractions that better fit a developer's mind frame. But this wasn't enough: with the advent of the *DevOps* movement,
application developers (who author business logic of an application) and platform operators (who provision and operate
the infrastructure which runs the developer's application) are increasingly often... the same people. Since existing IaC
programming models at the time typically relied on <abbr title="Domain Specific Language">DSL</abbr>s, there was an
opportunity to improve *DevOps* productivity by enabling developers to write their IaC in the same language they write
their application in.

<!-- more -->

## AWS' experience with SDKs

AWS has had tooling available for a variety of programming language for a while already: officially supported *AWS
<abbr title="Software Development Kit">SDK</abbr>s* are available for the most popular languages. These are individually
written libraries, each crafted by a dedicated team of language specialists. While much of the code is in fact generated
from service models, the core functionality is hand-written for each language.

The consequence of this is that different SDKs have different features, behaviors, and performance. When a new
fundamental feature is added to the service models, each individual SDK needs to adopt it separately, possibly on very
different timelines. When a bug is discovered in an SDK, it is difficult to determine whether the same bug exists in
other SDKs, and if so - to port the fix over.

Generating libraries from service models also has limitations: the service model is built with the intent to describe
the service's API as it's implemented. It is hence tightly coupled to the service's protocol of choice (e.g: REST, SOAP,
...), which is usually tailed for machine interaction, not for human consumption. This in turn contributes to making it
harder for developers to map their mental model to the service's surface, and increases the perceived complexity of the
services. Abstractions would solve this, but they realize their maximum potential when they are written by humands with
a good understanding of the service's use-cases, and how customers are supposed to use it.

## A plan emerges

With all this in mind, the original design for [AWS CDK][aws-cdk] opted for a slightly different approach than that of
the AWS SDks, with the goal of ensuring maintainers would be able to spend their time working on high-added-value API
design, while not having to concern themselves with multiple different programming languages:

1. [AWS CDK][aws-cdk] applications will use *AWS CloudFormation* as a provisioning engine &ndash; it's reliable and well
   tested, and building a provisioning engine from scratch would be a distraction;
1. Generate a baseline from the [*CloudFormation* resource specification][cfn-spec] in order to reduce the boilerplate
   needed in order to get started with writing abstractions;
1. Hand-write abstractions once, in a single language;
1. Re-use that code for all supported languages &ndash; via generated bindings.

This is how [jsii] was originally imagined: a collection of tools that processes *TypeScript* class libraries and
generates bindings in the supported languages.

### Why *TypeScript*?

Well for starters, it was difficult to miss such an obvious opportunity to uphold *Atwood's Law*:

> Any application that can be written in Javascript, will eventually be written in Javascript.
>
> <span class="before:content-['\2014\00A0'] before:inline-block italic">[<cite>Jeff Atwood</cite>][jeff-atwood], circa 2007.</span>

*Javascript* is pervasive today &ndash; runtimes have excellent performance characteristics and are readily available
for virtually any platform you'd think about. Web browsers all come with a *Javascript* engine, such as Google Chrome's
[V8] that incidentially also is the engine of choice for the popular [Node] platform.

*Javascript* however lacks built-in support for static typing, which is essentially required for the task at hand:
static type information is necessary in order to build idiomatic-looking bindings in statically typed languages such as
*Java*. This is where *TypeScript* comes into the picture: the Microsoft-developed language quickly became popular and
the standard *TypeScript* compiler has an API that can be used to process a program or library's
<abbr title="Abstract Syntax Tree">AST</abbr>, complete with type information (statically declared as well as inferred).

A proof-of-concept version of `jsii` was written using the *TypeScript* compiler API, which traverses `export`ed
declarations from a *TypeScript* module's entry point (as specified by the `types` key in `package.json`), and produces
a `.jsii` assembly document that describes the module's types. Next, `jsii-pacmak` was created to consume the `.jsii`
assembly and generate *Java* bindings to these, with the intention of looking as idiomatic as possible.

## Code Generation

*TypeScript* is a modern language with a powerful type system &ndash; perhaps too powerful. In the quest to generate
idiomatic-looking bindings in other languages, this flexibility quickly became a problem... Many *TypeScript* idioms are
simply not supported in other languages. Some of them can be emulated, but only at the expense of additional boilerplate
and leaking out *TypeScript*-isms to the bindings language. Others have semantics that cannot be easily replicated in
all languages, as features with similar syntax exists, but semantics differ in ways that would be problematic <aside>
(for example, *TypeScript* mapped types use syntax reminiscent of *Java* or *C#* generics, but the semantics in each of
these languages vary)</aside>. Some features are simply not uniformly available in all languages, such as:

- *Go* generics have very limited functionality compared to *Java* or *C#*
- *C#* is strict about the [*Liskov Substitution principle*][lsp] and does not allow covariant specialization of members
- Very few languages support *optional* members in the way *TypeScript* does
- ...

In order to improve odds of success, `jsii` effectively implements a dialect of *TypeScript*: exported API elements may
only use a subset of the *TypeScript* syntax, while private implementation details are free to leverage all features of
the language.

### Programming Localization

Idioms often translate across languages but sometimes in very different ways. For example, *Javascript* traditionally
uses _property bags_ to provide a constructor with configuration, which was a natural fit for [AWS CDK][aws-cdk]
construct properties:

```js
const bucket = new s3.Bucket(this, 'BucketName', {
    blockPublicAccess: s3.BlockPublicAccess.BLOCK_ALL,
    enforceSsl: true,
});
```

This idiom could be naively translated to *Java* in the following way:

```java
Bucket bucket = new s3.Bucket(this, "BucketName", new BucketOptions() {
    @Override
    public s3.BlockPublicAccess getBlockPublicAccess() {
        return s3.BlockPublicAccess.BLOCK_ALL;
    }

    @Override
    public Boolean getEnforceSsl() {
        return true;
    }
});
```

This is however not the *Java* idiom. Translating the syntax elements from one language to another is not sufficient, it
needs to be _localized_ &ndash; that is the target language's _culture_ must be taken into account. The *Java* idiom
that corresponds to *Javascript*'s property bag is the _builder pattern_:

```java
Bucket bucket = s3.Bucket.Builder.create(this, "BucketName")
    .blockPublicAccess(s3.BlockPublicAccess.BLOCK_ALL)
    .enforceSsl(true)
    .build();
```

This is one example of the kind of _localization_ work that is happening in `jsii-pacmak`, but it does not stop here, as
it also accounts for naming pattern differences:
- *C#* and *Go* use `PascalCase` for naming _public_ API elements
- *C#* prefers `I`-prefixing _all_ interface names
- *Java* hides properties behind *getter* and *setter* methods
- *Python* uses `snake_case` for method and property names

The `jsii` compiler performs checks and validations to ensure case- and name-conversions do not result in two legitimate
API elements from *TypeScript* resulting in a name collision in any of the target languages. It also prohibits creating
APIs that would be found to be illegal in other languages (such as covariant specialization being illegal in *C#*).

## Conclusion

You now understand the history of why [jsii] was created and have a rough idea of design constraints deriving from the
goals [jsii] seeks to achieve.

[aws-cdk]: https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk
[cdk-book-fw]: https://thecdkbook.com/foreword.html
[cdk-book]: https://thecdkbook.com
[cfn-spec]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/cfn-resource-specification.html
[jeff-atwood]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeff_Atwood
[lsp]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liskov_substitution_principle
[jsii]: https://github.com/aws/jsii
[Node]: https://nodejs.org
[V8]: https://v8.dev
