---
title: New year, new me
icon: chat-text-fill
---

I don't quite do new year resolutions usually, but this year feels like a pivot,
following my job change in September last year, and somehow this compels me into
setting an _intention_ of sorts, for this year and what comes beyond.

<!-- more -->

## Career

Parts of what motivated my departure from Amazon/AWS was the feeling my career
was stagnating. Getting promoted to Principal Engineer is notoriously a tough
feat to achieve at Amazon, but I got to a point where it felt like I was making
no progress at all &mdash; leadership was clearly uninterested in investing in
the projects I was pushing for, and I got tired of wasting my energy fighting
this lost battle.

Now that I feel pretty well settled at Datadog, I decided to be very intentional
about my career progression, and insist on making tangible progress towards a
promotion to Staff Engineer (which is Datadog's version of Amazon PE). Doing
this means exerting influence beyond just my team and proactively driving new
initiatives. I've recently got a second mentor to help me drive this goal of
mine.

In addition to this, I want to finally turn my desire to share my expertise and
experience a reality. On top of regularly participating the yearly Télécom Nancy
final year off-site (where I tell final year students about my experience, and try
to prepare them for job hunting, and setting expectations about what it is to
have a software engineering job), I am setting out to speak at conferences if my
talk proposals are accepted (I am in the process of submitting a talk for
DockerCon EU &ndash; Berlin).

## Personal

On a more personal note, beyond striving to keep to my goal of publishing a new
article to this blog a month at least (I'm low-key aiming for once every other
week as much as possible); I want focus on my health more than I've done in the
past few years.

I feel good in my job right now and have a lot of freedom in how I manage my
time, which makes it possible for me to get back to exercise. I'm seriously
contemplating going to the swimming pool on a regular basis, hopefully lose a
few kilograms (`10` would be dope).
